Developer Guide
===============

I. Setup
Assume that we have led them to the proper environment

II. Helo Web

Let's publish a web page. 

Create the file `/path/to/your/hymn.hook` and type (link to pyth hard way) the following code:

    ;html
      ;head
        ;title: Helo
      ==
      ;body: Helo web.
    ==

Save it and direct your web browser to: `http://your-ship.urbit.org/path/to/your/`.

You have just rendered a webpage using [`++sail`](link), the hoon markup language.

II. Sail

The page we rendered consists of an `<html>` node containing two nodes, the `<head>` and the `<body>`. The hoon structure for an XML node is opened with a `;` followed by the tag name, and is closed by a `==` aligned directly beneath the `;`. Any subnodes are included in between, and are indented by two spaces. The hoon model for these nodes is called a [`++manx`](link).

The method employed above for including character data within a `++manx` consists of appending a `:` to the end of the tag. In this construct, the `manx` is closed with a new line. You can see this in the `;body;` tag above. Attributes are enclosed by parentheses after the tag name, and are comma-separated. They look something like this: `;a(href "http://www.example.com", style "color:red")`

The `++manx` produced by our code above and the html that it renders are shown below:

    [ [%html ~]
      [[%head ~] [[%title ~] [[%~. [%~. "Hello"] ~] ~] ~] ~]
      [[%body ~] [[%~. [%~. "Helo web."] ~] ~] ~]
      ~
    ]

    "<html><head><title>Hello</title></head><body>Helo web.</body></html>"

Let's take our previous example a little further. Try writing the following in to the file in our previous example:

    ;html
      ;head
        ;title: Helo
      ==
      ;body
        ;h1: Helo web
        ;p(style "color: blue"): We can write in blue.
        ;a(href "http://www.example.com/"): And link to things too!
      ==
    ==

Since `++sail` is naitive hoon, we can also run code in-line. To interpolate expressions in `++sail`, insert the expression between a pair of brackets, like this: `;div:"2+2 = {(add 2 2)}"`. Try the example below in `/path/to/your/hymn.hook` and render it in the browser to view the evalution of this hoon expression: `?:((gth 2 1) "ol" "0")`

    ;html
      ;head
        ;title: Helo
      ==
      ;body: Helo web.
        ;h1: This is a heading
        ;p: "Paragraph with interp{?:((gth 2 1) "ol" "false")}ated text"
    ==

III. Twigs

As shown, the result are the characters 'ol', which is interpolated into the character data of the paragraph node, which is then rendered as HTML and served to your browser.

The expression `?:((gth 2 1) "o" "0")}`, like all other expressions in hoon, compiles down to an [Abstract Syntax Tree](link), which in hoon is called a [`++twig`](link). Twigs are constructed using symbols called [runes](link), which are character pairs.

In this expression we use the rune `?:` pronounced `wutcol`. C programmers will notice the similarity between `wutcol` amd C's if-then-else statement, which is precisely what wutcol is. 

When parsed, an expression framed with `?:` generates the twig:

    [%wtcl p=twig q=twig r=twig]                ::  if p, then q, else r

As you can see, the twig %wtcl requires three twigs:

1. The first (p) must be a twig that evaluates to a [loobean](link). In this case, it is the expression `(gth 2 1)`, which is parsed to the twig cenhep, or `%cnhp`:

    [%cnhp p=twig q=tusk]                       ::  slam p w/ sample q

cenhep takes a twig `p` that accepts an argument (called a 'sample' in hoon) of a list of one or more twigs q called a `++tusk`(link). In this case, `p` is the function (called an 'arm' in hoon) `++gth`, which compiles down to the twig cenzaz, or `%cnzz`:

    [%cnzz p=wing]                              ::  pulls p

`%cnzz` is used to match the name `gth` with the associated axis address (link) to retrieve the source code of the `gth` function from the context:

    [%cnzz p=wing]                              ::  pulls p
    [%$ p=axis]                                 ::  simple leg

Note: Here the second twig is %$(the empty name), which consists of an address of the code to be loaded

The `tusk`(list of twigs) gth accepts here are the constants 2 and 1,  which both compile to the synthetic twig dotzey(link), which produces an atomic constant(link) of type p and value q:

    [%dtzy p=term q=@]                          ::  atom constant

Note: term(link) is just a string used as a type identifier

Here, cenhep--gth called (slammed in hoon, link) with the constants 2 and 1--produces true, or `%.y` in hoon.

2-3. The latter two twigs required by %wtcl are strings, called "tapes"(link) "ol" and "0", which also parses to %dtzy. As the first twig of %wtcl evaluates to %.y, the second twig, dtzy, with the value "o" is evaluated, producing the character "o", which is interpolated into the sail char data that is then rendered as
html. 
